# History of Media Studies Newsletter December 2023 

*Welcome to the 34th edition of the [History of Media Studies Newsletter](https://hms.mediastudies.press/newsletter). The monthly email, assembled by Dave Park, Jeff Pooley, and Pete Simonson, maintains a loose affiliation with the new [*History of Media Studies*](https://hms.mediastudies.press) journal and the [Working Group on the History of Media Studies](https://www.chstm.org/media-studies). Please [contact us](mailto:hms@mediastudies.press) with any questions, suggestions, or items.*

<br>


## 1. Working Group on the History of Media Studies

*Note: The Working Group is on a hiatus in January, and will resume in February. In the meantime, please take a moment to complete this [survey](https://airtable.com/appNntzWVWv76ZQEY/pagqtxLFYrfeO0NjL/form) about the online session timing, if you have not already.*

*The Working Group is hosted by the [Consortium for History of Science, Technology and Medicine](https://www.chstm.org/media-studies) (CHSTM). Open to anyone interested in the history of the media studies fields. [Instructions to join](https://hms.mediastudies.press/working-group) are [here](https://hms.mediastudies.press/working-group).*

Questions? [Contact us](mailto:hms@mediastudies.press)*

<br>


## 2. Conferences, Calls & Announcements

*If you have a call or announcement relevant to the history of media studies, please [contact us](mailto:hms@mediastudies.press).*

<br>

1. *CFP: ICA Pre-conference: Repressed Histories of Communication and Media Studies* 
	* This year’s pre-conference focuses on “Repressed Histories” in the fields of media, information, and communication studies. We invite proposals that address our focus on “repressed histories” in and of the field by taking seriously and engaging directly with research, theories, sites, and thinkers whose contributions have been sidestepped, marginalized, occluded, or have simply not received the attention they deserve because of their geographical location, the historical traditions their belong to, as well as the combined effects of publishing circuits, border control, linguistic barriers, and knowledge traditions that continue to shape our field.
	* **Deadline:** 30 January 2024
	* [More details](https://www.icahdq.org/mpage/ICA24-repressed)
1. *History of the Human Sciences, Early Career Prize, 2023-24* 
	* *History of the Human Sciences* – the international journal of peer-reviewed research, which provides the leading forum for work in the social sciences, humanities, human psychology and biology that reflexively examines its own historical origins and interdisciplinary influences – is delighted to announce details of its annual prize for early career scholars. The intention of the annual award is to recognise a researcher whose work best represents the journal’s aim to critically examine traditional assumptions and preoccupations about human beings, their societies and their histories in light of developments that cut across disciplinary boundaries. In the pursuit of these goals, *History of the Human Sciences* publishes traditional humanistic studies as well work in the social sciences, including the fields of sociology, psychology, political science, the history and philosophy of science, anthropology, classical studies, and literary theory. Scholars working in any of these fields are encouraged to apply.
	* **Deadline:** 26 January 2024
	* [More details](https://app.sparkmailapp.com/web-share/izhXTP-JJSxUS1ofISEx3dJXkT6W2H1ltStRcr8Y)
1. *CFP: Ninth Annual Conference on the History of Recent Social Science (HISRESS)* 
	* This two-day conference of the Society for the History of Recent Social Science (HISRESS), at the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia, will bring together researchers working on the history of post-World War II social science. It will provide a forum for the latest research on the cross-disciplinary history of the post-war social sciences, including but not limited to anthropology, economics, psychology, political science, and sociology as well as related fields like area studies, communication studies, design, history, international relations, law, linguistics, and urban studies. The conference aims to build upon the recent emergence of work and conversation on cross-disciplinary themes in the postwar history of the social sciences.
	* **Deadline:** 2 February 2024
	* [More details](https://hisress.org/cfp/)
1. *Making of the Humanities XI - Save the Date* 
	* The next Making of the Humanities conference will be held at Lund University, Sweden from October 9-11, 2024. The MoH conferences bring together scholars and bring together scholars and historians interested in the history of a wide variety of disciplines, including archaeology, art history, historiography, linguistics, literary studies, media studies, musicology, and philology, tracing these fields from their earliest developments to the modern day.
	* [More details](https://www.historyofhumanities.org/2023/10/31/making-of-the-humanities-xi-save-the-date/)
1. *CFP: Global Circulations of Film Theory Conference* 
	* This conference aims to revisit the question of what film theory is by asking where it takes place, how we recognize it, and where we find it across international locales. Starting from the premise that film theory is global, multiple, and coeval rather than something that emanates from the West and then spreads, the conference will focus on bringing to light marginalized or hitherto unknown histories of film theorizing, as well as new engagements with entrenched theoretical debates from different geopolitical perspectives. The two-day event will draw together different scholarly perspectives from around the world to develop transnational conceptualizations of film theory that can contribute to debates about decolonizing the field. We invite papers on film theory and theorizing from any area of the globe at any historical moment. 
	* **Deadline:** 29 January 2024
	* [More details](https://buttondown.email/communicationhistory/archive/call-for-papers-global-circulations-of-film/)
1. *CFA: Circulating Knowledge - 20 Years On* 
	* In August 2004, the Circulation of Knowledge conference—co-organized by the Canadian Society for the History and Philosophy of Science, the British Society for History of Science, and the History Science Society—challenged the then-dominant centre-periphery model of scientific knowledge origin and dissemination and led to the creation of the international research networks Situating Science and Cosmopolitanism and the Local. Much has happened since then, and it is time not only to take stock, but to open new research avenues in HPS and STS. Through a series of talks, roundtables and special events, the conference Circulating Knowledge – 20 Years On aims to: stimulate debates on the global transit of knowledge of the natural world around three axes: research, translation, and pedagogy; establish new international collaborative research projects; support the development of international collaborative pedagogical initiatives (sourcebooks, textbooks, virtual exhibits)
	* **Deadline:** 25 January 2024
	* [More details](https://cosmolocal.org)
1. *CFA: The Past and Present of Humanities Peer Review* 
	* Peer review, i.e. the institutionalized evaluation of scholars and their outputs by others working in the same field, is fundamental to knowledge production and research evaluation in the present-day humanities. However, the origins and development of humanities peer review remain remarkably poorly understood, particularly in comparison to the history of peer review in the natural and social sciences. This *Minerva* special issue aims to bridge this knowledge gap by exploring the historical evolution of peer review in humanities disciplines such as history, theology, philosophy, musicology, and linguistics. It seeks to uncover the diverse forms of humanities peer review that have existed throughout history, extending beyond currently dominant practices of academic peer review. 
	* **Deadline:** 15 March 2024
	* [More details](https://link.springer.com/collections/cfbbdhfibe)
1. *CFP: European Society for the History of the Human Sciences* 
	* The European Society for the History of the Human Sciences (ESHHS) invites submissions to its 43rd conference to be held from 25 to 28 June 2024. The conference will be hosted by the University of Essex, at its Colchester campus in the UK, and will be held in person only. We invite proposals for oral presentations, posters, symposia or workshops that deal with any aspect of the history of the human, behavioural and social sciences or with related historiographic or methodological issues. This year’s conference particularly encourages submissions related to the theme of inner life.
	* **Deadline:** 15 March 2024
	* [More details](https://www.eshhs.eu/wordpress-3.3.1/wordpress/?p=1967)
1. *CFP: Society for U.S. Intellectual History* 
	* The 2024 USIH Conference will be a fully in-person meeting in Boston convening on November 14-16 at the Boston Sheraton. Due to the prohibitive costs of hybrid events (in combination with the challenges of making such events pleasant for participants), there will be no hybrid options for presentation or attendance. Within those parameters, we plan to facilitate a conference that is accessible and welcoming to all who identify under USIH’s broad definition of intellectual history as “ideas in action.” We are committed to using the meeting as a venue for strengthening institutional connections to related organizations and contributing to USIH’s ongoing efforts in DEI. The conference theme is “Knowledge and Belief.”
	* **Deadline:** 15 April 2024
	* [More details](https://s-usih.org/2023/12/s-usih-2024-cfp/)


<br>


## 3. The Journal

[*History of Media Studies*](https://hms.mediastudies.press) was [recently indexed](https://www.mediastudies.press/pub/2023-12-22-hms-doaj/) in the Directory of Open Access Journals.

*HMS* encourages [submissions](https://hms.mediastudies.press/author-guidelines) ([en español](https://hms.mediastudies.press/directrices-para-autores)) on the history of research, education, and reflective knowledge about media and communication—as expressed through academic institutions; through commercial, governmental, and non-governmental organizations; and through “alter-traditions” of thought and practice often excluded from the academic mainstream.

<br>


## 4. New Publications

*Works listed here are newly published, or new to the [bibliography](https://www.asc.upenn.edu/research/centers/annenberg-school-communication-library-archives/collections/history-field).*

*The [History of Communication Research Bibliography](https://www.asc.upenn.edu/research/centers/annenberg-school-communication-library-archives/collections/history-field) is a project of the [Annenberg School for Communication Library Archives](https://www.asc.upenn.edu/research/centers/annenberg-school-for-communication-library-archives) (ASCLA) at the University of Pennsylvania.* 

1. Arthos, John. "Escaping the Prison House of Effects: The Persistence of an Anachronism in Rhetoric Studies." _Rhetoric Society Quarterly_ 53, no. 5 (2023): 609--23. <https://doi.org/10.1080/02773945.2023.2191212>
> *ABSTRACT:* Persuasive effect will always be an essential part of rhetoric studies, but it should not be either its ready shorthand, identifying trait, or lodestar. The decades-long momentum to move beyond the identification of rhetoric with the production and management of effects should be pointedly encouraged, with many new rhetorical imaginaries (invitational, dialogic, agonistic, ecologic, etc.) providing ample resources for doing so. This paper will describe the self-limiting nature of an effects frame, show that there have always been alternatives within rhetoric's traditions to move beyond it, outline the persistence of a first-order identification with persuasive effect in contemporary disciplinary history, and point to specific ways to put this habit in the rear-view mirror. The rhetorical appropriation of Foucault's interpretation of parrhesia is explored as an example of a rhetorical practice that moves beyond the reductive straight-jacket of effects. 

2. Baumann, Sabine. "Handbook of Media Management and Economics by Alan Albarran, Bozena Mierzejewska, and Jaemin Jung." _Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly_ 100, no. 4 (2023): 1011--13. <https://doi.org/10.1177/10776990231176002>
> *ABSTRACT:* [first paragraph, in lieu of abstract] Compared with other fields in management and economics, the specialization in media as an established subdiscipline is relatively young. Thus, the publication of the first edition of the first ever Handbook of Media Management and Economics in 2006 became a milestone that, according to the editors of the first edition, Alan B. Albarran, now emeritus professor of media arts at the University of North Texas, Sylvia M. Chan-Olmsted, professor in the department of media production, management, and technology and director of consumer research at the University of Florida, and Michael O. Wirth, now dean emeritus of the college of communication & information (CCI) and professor emeritus of journalism and electronic media at the University of Tennessee, Knoxville, was to achieve two primary goals: (a) assess and capture the state of knowledge in the field of media management and economics (MME) and (b) establish a research agenda for the next decade (Albarran et al., 2006). The handbook became an invaluable resource for the growing group of scholars in the field wanting to learn about the history and theoretical dimensions in MME, as well as what makes the media industries so special in terms of products, market developments, media business operations, or their global scope. In addition, the handbook served as the accepted reference for the recognized and maturing knowledge and literatures in MME that had been missing at the time. As such, it also complemented the three MME journals that had recently been established: the Journal of Media Economics (1988), the International Journal on Media Management (1999), and the Journal of Media Business Studies (2004). As anticipated by the editors, the next decade saw a growing stream of research following and adding on to the handbook's proposed research agenda. 

3. Brennan, Nathaniel. "Gotham Book Mart's Spring 1938 Film File Catalog." _Film History: An International Journal_ 34, no. 4 (2022): 83--108. <https://doi.org/10.2979/fih.2022.a900043>
> *ABSTRACT:* This essay introduces the Gotham Book Mart Film File, a bibliographic catalog of film literature published in 1938. The Film File is placed in dialogue with contemporaneous efforts at cultural institutions like the Museum of Modern Art to develop film studies as a field of research. The Gotham Book Mart's catalog functions in numerous ways: generally, it reflects the state of film studies as a developing discipline in 1938; it broadens our understanding of how cultural institutions shape fields of knowledge; and it illustrates how these institutions, large and small, converged in New York's film culture. The essay suggests that bookshops and publishing were as important in the history of the city's cultural life--and in the development of new disciplines like film studies--as libraries, museums, and archives. 

4. Chan-Olmsted, Sylvia M., and Jaemin Jung. "Mapping the Evolution of Media Management and Industry Studies in Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly: 100-Year Retrospective and Future Directions." _Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly_ 100, no. 4 (2023): 847--74. <https://doi.org/10.1177/10776990231200196>
> *ABSTRACT:* To draw a picture of the evolution of media management research in the context of published scholarly work, this invited piece reviews works related to media management and industry studies published in JMCQ for the past 100 years. Initially, attention was paid to understanding the basics of newspaper as an economic entity. Since then, the status of chain ownership and consolidation, impacts of consolidation on newspaper content, intermedia competition, human resource management, business strategy, adoption/consumption, engagement, and recently, AI in the media industry were the major topics in the media management studies chronologically. Future directions for media management and industry studies were discussed. 

5. Clayton, Russell B., and Arthur A. Raney. "Media Effects: Advances in Theory and Research by Jennings Bryant and Dolf Zillmann." _Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly_ 100, no. 4 (2023): 1004--7. <https://doi.org/10.1177/10776990231173894>
> *ABSTRACT:* [first paragraph, in lieu of abstract] Media Effects: Advances in Theory and Research, an edited volume, has influenced, advanced, and transcended the field of communication since publication. Jennings Bryant, Distinguished Professor Emeritus at The University of Alabama College of Communication and Information Sciences, and Dolf Zillmann, Dean Emeritus, College of Communication & Information Sciences and Department of Psychology at the University of Alabama, are two internationally recognized "academic titans" in the areas of media effects and mass communication. In 1994, Bryant and Zillmann brought together the "leading lights" of media effects scholars to contribute to the anthology. In the pre-internet and pre-access-to-digital-articles era, having a collection of the experts contribute to one essential volume, en masse, was a significant feat at the time. Who better to explicate and summarize the evidence for media cultivation than George Gerbner and colleagues? Who better to discuss social cognitive theory than Albert Bandura? The volume, as a whole, sets an intellectual frame around, and parameters for, what now is increasingly referred to as the field of "media psychology." Soon after its appearance, the volume acquired the reputation as the proverbial "media effects bible." Media Effects enduring impact is undeniable, as the text and its subsequent editions published by Bryant and Zillmann (2002; 2nd)., Bryan and Oliver (2009; 3rd), and Oliver, Raney, and Bryant (2019; 4th) have provided the stalwart intellectual foundation for most undergraduateand graduate-level media effects courses over the past three decades. 

6. Dimitrova, Daniela. "Centennial Editorial Essay." _Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly_ 100, no. 4 (2023): 729--30. <https://doi.org/10.1177/10776990231204743>. 

7. Karayiannides, Efthimios. "Stuart Hall, Development Theory, and Thatcher's Britain." _Modern Intellectual History_ 20, no. 4 (2023): 1273--96. <https://doi.org/10.1017/S1479244322000555>
> *ABSTRACT:* This article traces the influence of theories of Third World underdevelopment on Stuart Hall's understanding of the nature of historical transitions. I show Hall's notion of "articulation," central to his social theory, is indebted to ideas about development originating in the global South, rather than to the thinking of "Western Marxists." By arguing that Antonio Gramsci was a theorist of "articulation," Hall read Gramsci as a thinker comparable to development theorists he was engaging with in the same period. This had important implications, I suggest, for Hall's "Gramscian" analyses of British politics in the 1980s. Specifically, I show that by describing Thatcherism as a form of "regressive modernization," Hall adopted the idiom of several theories of economic development to argue that the uneven development of capitalist relations of production is the key to understanding how advanced forms of capitalist accumulation can accommodate seemingly archaic and reactionary social relations and institutions. 

8. Kerr, Robert L., Ahran Park, and Kyu Ho Youm. "A Century of JMCQ Legal Issues in Media: Scholarly Commitment to Free Press, Free Speech, and More." _Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly_ 100, no. 4 (2023): 875--900. <https://doi.org/10.1177/10776990231207964>
> *ABSTRACT:* This systematic review of more than 300 Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly (JMCQ) articles on media law since 1924 documents what a vital scholarly outlet the journal has been and continues to be for research on freedom of the press and speech. While defamation law remains a popular topic, journalism and mass communication scholars have expanded their focus to a wider range of media law issues, including privacy, copyright, student speech, journalistic privilege, free press v. fair trial, advertising, and issues involving other media. JMCQ has been refreshingly open to international and comparative law, moving away from a U.S.-centric approach to media freedom. The review highlights a decline in the number of media law articles published in recent years, possibly due to competition from alternative journals, manuscript length limitations, and the APA-style requirement. Nevertheless, media law scholarship remains essential, offering invaluable insights into the evolving legal landscape of media. 

9. Kim, Jeong-Nam, Ming Ming Chiu, Hyelim Lee, Yu Won Oh, Homero Gil de Zúñiga, and Chong Hyun Park. "Mapping Media Research Paradigms: Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly's Century of Scientific Cevolution." _Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly_ 100, no. 4 (2023): 736--72. <https://doi.org/10.1177/10776990231213376>
> *ABSTRACT:* This retrospective review of nearly a century of publications in Journalism and Mass Communication Quarterly (JMCQ) traces the maturation of media studies toward a scientific discipline. The field's dominant paradigms--media effects and communicator uses--persist, adapt, and diversify over time, yielding actionable insights. Challenges include (a) bridging older and newer media theories, (b) harnessing data science, and (c) capitalizing on artificial intelligence/machine learning (AI/ML). Future media research can conceptualize evolving three-dimensional interactions among media, people, and AI. We propose seven initiatives for the next century: revisiting classical theories, fostering interdisciplinary collaboration, balancing descriptive and prescriptive theorization, nurturing indigenous theorizing, collaborating with industry, reverse theorizing with AI, and exploring and regulating AI's role in media. 

10. Luttrell, Regina. "Effective Public Relations by Scott M. Cutlip and Allen H. Center." _Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly_ 100, no. 4 (2023): 995--98. <https://doi.org/10.1177/10776990231177439>
> *ABSTRACT:* [first paragraph, in lieu of abstract] When I was invited to write a "re-review" of Effective Public Relations (4th edition), I was not only honored but also excited to revisit what many of us in academia and the profession consider the seminal text in the field of public relations (PR). It is difficult to truly grasp the sheer number of educators and practitioners who were introduced to the fundamentals of PR by combing through, highlighting, noting, and ultimately exercising best practices as presented within each chapter of the text. In 1952, when the first edition was published, our field was in its infancy. The function of PR was not clearly defined, its relevance not fully respected. In this book review, we will take a closer look at the impact that Scott M. Cutlip, a dean of the Grady College of Journalism and Mass Communication at the University of Georgia, and Allen H. Center, a prominent PR practitioner and distinguished resident lecturer at San Diego State University, had on shaping our field, exploring its limitations, and of course, examining its lasting legacy. 

11. Mano, Winston, and Nnaemeka Meribe. "African Communication Modes." In _The International Encyclopedia of Intercultural Communication_. New York: Wiley, 2017. <https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118783665.ieicc0124>
> *ABSTRACT:* This entry introduces African modes of communication, covering their history, context, and uses. An attempt is made to analytically distinguish communication modes that are indigenous to Africa from exogenous mass media, introduced to the continent by religious, business, and colonial forces. While the endogenous modes of communication in Africa are more resilient and widespread in rural areas, the exogenous modes pervade the urban settings that usually have better social and economic infrastructure. 

12. McGregor, Shannon C. "Governing With the News: The News Media as a Political Institution by Tim Cook." _Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly_ 100, no. 4 (2023): 998--1001. <https://doi.org/10.1177/10776990231175997>
> *ABSTRACT:* [first paragraph, in lieu of abstract] Building on the idea that the press represents the fourth branch of the government, Governing With the News formalizes, complicates, and richens this notion, arguing that the news media are themselves a political institution without which the other branches would not work. In doing so, Tim Cook--a former professor of journalism at Louisiana State University--establishes the media as essential to the functioning of government. Importantly, Cook stresses the inherent and unresolvable tension between the news media and the government--it is on this tension that he urges us to focus our scholarly gaze. Published first in 1998 with a second edition in 2005, Governing With the News has a clear and ambitious goal--to present ". . . a clear model that sees the news media as a coherent intermediary institution without which the three branches established by the Constitution could not act and could not work" (p. 2). This model no doubt played a significant role in the establishment of the so-called "new institutionalism" that has animated studies of journalism and political communication, as well as the development of mediatization. Although it has spurred decades of work since its initial publication, many of the questions raised by the work endure, with perhaps more urgency than before. 

13. Moody-Ramirez, Mia, Carolyn Byerly, Suman Mishra, and Silvio R. Waisbord. "Media Representations and Diversity in the 100 Years of Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly." _Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly_ 100, no. 4 (2023): 826--46. <https://doi.org/10.1177/10776990231196894>
> *ABSTRACT:* The Journal and Mass Communication Quarterly (JMCQ) has documented the struggle members of marginalized groups face in their quest to be treated equally in media content and careers. In this analysis, we note that the journal's century of articles documents the many historical shifts in the representation and treatment of women and minorities in media settings. Articles emphasize the lack of opportunities for advancement, management issues, and systemic inequities perpetuated by media content and practices. Less common were articles that examine the treatment of students and faculty in academia. 

14. Moreno, Ángeles, Clara Eugenia Argüello-González, Noelia Zurro-Antón, and Andréia Athaydes. "The State of Public Relations Research Addressing Latin America: Analysis of Published Articles in the Region's Official Languages between 1980 and 2020." _Public Relations Review_ 49, no. 5 (2023): 102383. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pubrev.2023.102383>
> *ABSTRACT:* This research aims to evaluate the scientific production on public relations addressing Latin America through a quantitative content and bibliometric analysis of articles and special issues published between 1980 and 2020, written in the official languages of the region: Spanish and Portuguese. The results of 123 articles confirm a substantial increase of studies since 2011, and some limitations of scientific dissemination. Although almost half of the authors were based in Brazil (40%), 17 base countries were counted. This work complements the latest studies on the object of study in English (Thelen, 2021) and provides the scientific community with recognition and access to native production. 

15. Oliver, Mary Beth, and Arthur A. Raney. "Media Effects Research in Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly." _Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly_ 100, no. 4 (2023): 793--807. <https://doi.org/10.1177/10776990231203539>
> *ABSTRACT:* This article presents an analysis of media effects articles published in JMCQ from 1954 to 2020. Although the primary focus of our sample of articles focused on news, a wealth of additional topics were also examined, including attitude change, media selection, and sharing of media content. While some of this body of scholarship reflects more "traditional" conceptualizations of media effects research, others point to a broader conceptualization that reflects individuals as active in their selection, processing, evaluation, and even creation of media content. 

16. Pedwell, Carolyn. "Introduction." _Media Theory_ 7, no. 2 (2023): 127--52. <https://journalcontent.mediatheoryjournal.org/index.php/mt/article/view/216>
> *ABSTRACT:* In this Introduction to our special section on 'Laurent Berlant and Media Theory', I argue, with our contributors, that both appreciating and extending Berlant's vital contributions to media theory requires addressing the distinctive place of 'mediation' in her/their writing. The first section addresses the challenges and potentialities of efforts to position Berlant within existing genealogies of media theory, with particular attention to their work on affective genres, scenes, cases, and attachments. The second section explores the shifting relations among infrastructure, data politics and the making of media theory that Berlant's capacious mode of cultural critique helps us sense and make sense of -with a focus on intimacy-infrastructure entanglements, whether with respect to the 'inconvenience' of networked media and AI or the affective possibilities of collaborative projects of writing otherwise. What constitutes Berlant's most profound lesson concerning what it means to live lives immanently mediated by aesthetic-material forms, genres, and infrastructures, I conclude, is that friction, vulnerability, and ambivalence, are our vital animating conditions -and how we negotiate them personally and collectively is both a matter of survival and an affective-political art. 

17. Perloff, Richard M. "The Dark Green Book That Transformed a Field: Reflections on the Legacy of Kline and Tichenor." _Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly_ 100, no. 4 (2023): 981--92. <https://doi.org/10.1177/10776990231181420>
> *ABSTRACT:* This article traces the five-decade legacy of a classic volume, Current Perspectives in Mass Communication Research, edited by Kline and Tichenor, published in 1972. After charting the epistemological origins of the book, the paper describes the particular confluence of factors--conceptual, university-based, interpersonal, and the forging of a propitious professional relationship between the book's co-editor and Sage Publications--that explain the provenance and critical impact of the book. The paper notes the contributions, shortcomings, and strengths of the 1972 volume, reflecting on the unique role the book played in the development of journalism and mass communication research. 

18. Perreault, Mildred F. "Representation: Cultural Representations and Signifying Practices by Stuart Hall." _Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly_ 100, no. 4 (2023): 1009--11. <https://doi.org/10.1177/10776990231175689>
> *ABSTRACT:* [first paragraph, in lieu of abstract] The landmark writing on representation and its impacts come from Stuart Hall, an established sociological scholar who never completed a PhD. Hall was an Oxfordeducated, Jamaican-born scholar who established norms of practice around studying media and images. Hall, a professor of sociology and head of the Sociology at Open University beginning in 1972. He retired in 1997 and passed away in 2014. His interpretive work spanned both cultural and structural paradigms with publications from 1951 to 1997. 

19. Peters, Jonathan. "Free Speech in the United States by Zechariah Chafee, Jr." _Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly_ 100, no. 4 (2023): 1007--9. <https://doi.org/10.1177/10776990231173892>
> *ABSTRACT:* [first paragraph, in lieu of abstract] Free Speech in the United States explores the First Amendment's meaning--its promise and proper limits--in times of peace and conflict. There are detailed discussions of government efforts to censor films and to regulate bookstores--and to prosecute dissidents, nonconformists, and gadflies, often under wartime sedition laws. On that score, in particular, through its close examination of World War I, the book presents "the history of a struggle . . . that had casualties, killings and maimings and brutalities like other wars. . . . But its chief casualty was the collapse of the desire . . . of many . . . Americans to maintain the Constitution when it became difficult to do so." (Radin, 1942, p. 232) The author, Zechariah Chafee, Jr., was "possibly the most important First Amendment scholar of the first half of the twentieth century" (Primus, 1998, p. 294). Chafee established the reputation of a tireless advocate for individual liberties, both as a scholar and "the man in the arena" (Cullinane, 2022). His public speaking and writing were so impactful, in fact, that Senator Joseph McCarthy, at the height of his anticommunist crusades, named Chafee one of seven people "dangerous" to the United States ("Post Plans Editorial Attack on Chafee," 1952). 

20. Reese, Stephen D. "Four Theories of the Press: The Authoritarian, Social Responsibility and Soviet Communist Concepts of What the Press Should Be and Do by Fred S. Siebert, Theodore Peterson, and Wilbur Schramm." _Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly_ 100, no. 4 (2023): 993--95. <https://doi.org/10.1177/10776990231173893>
> *ABSTRACT:* [first paragraph, in lieu of abstract] The Four Theories of the Press has earned sustained prominence in the field's canoni cal literature since its publication in 1956. Like many such "seminal" works, the book has accumulated a history of its own, obligatory nods in countless literature reviews, and layers of interpretation through the many citations to its insights--I suspect by many more than have actually read the original (including until recently, I admit, the present reviewer). The many critiques since publication include several book reviews, a well-researched intellectual history (Rantanen, 2017), and a full-length edited vol ume (Nerone, 1995). A number of themes recur in these engagements with the book, including that it is over-simplified and appears thrown together by the authors, each following its own path with little overall coordination. Lacking a fuller introduction and an actual concluding chapter, the broader U.S. liberal point of view characterizing the work is embedded as basic premise, with a clear "We" in an Us vs. Them, Cold War-era framing, making it easy in retrospect to fault the authors for their American overconfidence and taken-for-granted ideology. These criticisms did not and have not hurt the still-robust sales, leading me to question anew the reasons for its enduring place in the field's tradition, and indeed consider what else there is to add to the discus sion after all these years. 

21. Rice, Ronald E., and Erik P. Bucy. "Mapping Media Developments and Issues: Topics, Clusters, and Content of JMCQ Articles on Communication Technology/Media Channels, 1935--2017." _Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly_ 100, no. 4 (2023): 901--32. <https://doi.org/10.1177/10776990231196895>
> *ABSTRACT:* This study analyzed JMCQ articles in the specific topic area of mass communication technology and media channels, overall and across four 20-year periods. Primary topics changed from emphasizing media industry and policy issues, international issues of information freedom, audience research, and WWII media issues in early periods to more specific regulatory issues, ratings and audience analyses, macro and social issues, and media technology development issues in more recent periods. JMCQ serves as a treasure trove of the history of broadcast media technology and competition, policy debates, and audience interests, with a recent emphasis on more rigorous empirical analyses. 

22. Robinson, David C. "Culture and Materialism: Raymond Williams and the Marxist Debate." Phd, Simon Fraser University, 1991. <https://summit.sfu.ca/_flysystem/fedora/sfu_migrate/3546/b14095750.pdf>
> *ABSTRACT:* This thesis represents a study of Raymond Williams's work in the sociology of culture. It attempts to critically interrogate and assess Williams's theory of "cultural materialism". The argument put forth is that William's work, thought not unproblematic, represents a significant reconstruction of Marxist theory. The focus of the study includes: tracing the genealogy of the Marxist problematic; an analysis of Williams's intervention into the Marxian materialist debate; an extended discussion of Marxist cultural theory and Williams's relationship to issues raised in the literature; the development, as an extension of insights gained from cultural materialism, of a critical theory of culture that attempts to theorize a specific cultural form--the urban crime-drama cinema of the 1970's--within the actual historical conditions of its production. 

23. Segado-Boj, Francisco. "Research on Social Media and Journalism (2003-2017): A Bibliometric and Content Review." _Transinformação_ 32 (2020). <https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-9865202032e180096>
> *ABSTRACT:* This paper introduces a bibliometric review of the scientific literature on social media and journalism published by journals indexed by Journal Citation Reports until 2017 (n=213). Besides descriptive measurements, it provides a co-citation and co-word analysis. A quantitative content analysis complements the bibliometric approach. Thus, the paper offers a conceptual and structural analysis of the field of study. Results show that the number of articles on the topic is growing steadily since 2014. United States, Australia and England stand as the most productive countries. Studies are based mostly on data from Europe and North America. Three conceptual clusters are identified: audience participation, user generated content and the influence of social media on journalistic professional values and practices. Most of the studies did not consider specific services but focused on the general concept of "social media". Twitter was the most analyzed platform until recent years, when scholarly attention changed towards Facebook. Research has preferred focusing on political information in detriment of other branches of journalism. The most employed methods are content analysis and in-depth interviews. Further use of surveys and social network analysis, as well as stronger focus on visual studies, is suggested. 

24. Seigworth, Gregory, and Rebecca Coleman. "'There Is No Direct Evidence of Anything.'" _Media Theory_ 7, no. 2 (2023): 171--90. <https://journalcontent.mediatheoryjournal.org/index.php/mt/article/view/218>
> *ABSTRACT:* In this essay, we track back and forth between Lauren Berlant's and Raymond Williams' work to assemble a purposefully compact genealogy of mediation that also pays attention to how mediation intersects with and often redraws many taken-for-granted understandings of affect, ideology, aesthetics and materialism. We explore how, for Berlant and Williams, mediation requires a suspension or dislodging of direct cause and effect relations in favour of an intuitive (and conjectural) analytics of the ongoing overdeterminations that circulate through and about any particular affective/historical conjuncture. Reckoning with mediation has a profound impact too on our practices of writing and theorising -as critical-creative impulses, drawn from the intertwining rhythms of experience/experiment, emerge from the changing yet precise situations of the ordinary day-to-day. We argue that such a conceptualisation of mediation offers a productive means for attuning to and transforming the capacities of intellectual work, media/digital culture, and everyday life from within the midst of a continua of transformation. 

25. Singer, Jane B., Seth C. Lewis, and Karin Wahl-Jorgensen. "Journalism in the Quarterly: A Century of Change in the Industry and the Academy." _Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly_ 100, no. 4 (2023): 773--92. <https://doi.org/10.1177/10776990231189455>
> *ABSTRACT:* The very first article published in the new Journalism Quarterly, in January 1924, was titled "The Professional Spirit." It was a fitting start for the journal, which over the next 100 years tracked the maturation of journalism as a profession and journalism studies as a field of scholarly inquiry. This article explores how "journalism" evolved in the pages of the journal through a turbulent century. By analyzing the changing debates and tracking the incremental but steady expansion of knowledge, we seek to provide insights into where journalism scholarship started, the path we traveled, and how we arrived at today. 

26. Slaymaker, James Michael. "'Enter the Memory': Interactivity, Authorship, and the Empowered Spectator in the Digital Audio-Visual Essays of Chris Marker." _Open Screens_ 6, no. 1 (2023). <https://doi.org/10.16995/OS.8477>
> *ABSTRACT:* This article theorizes the cinematic essay as a fluid, self-reflexive form which addresses the spectator directly in order to engage them in an intellectual process of dialogical exchange. Because it encourages the active involvement of the viewer in the determination of essayistic meaning, the cinematic essay challenges traditional models of authorship. Asopposed to relaying information to a passive viewer from a position of authority and omniscience, the cinematic essayist offers tentative thoughts and ruminations which the spectator is called upon to critically think through and use as the foundation for their own essayistic reflections. The evolution of digital filmmaking technologies over the past few decades has opened new creative avenues through which cinematic essayists may construct interactive viewing situations and treat the spectator as an empowered co-creator of artistic meaning. This article focuses on two of Chris Marker's late-period works to examine the relationship between dialogical exchange, interactive spectatorship, and the capabilities of the digital database: Immemory (1997)and Ouvroir (2012). In these works, Marker carries overhis career-long impulse towards dialogism to the realm of the digitized database, composingintricate, intermedial constellations of archival materials which theviewer may peruse in whatever order they please. Rejecting the fixed sequential ordering of causal film editing, as well as the strict classificatory systems of chronological archiving, Marker embraces new media to enable the spectator to traverse historical time through a dynamic, rhizomatic structure which fosters the forging of dynamic and individualized intertextual linkages. 

27. Tomaselli, Keyan G. "Repositioning African Media Studies: Thoughts and Provocations." _Journal of African Media Studies_ 1, no. 1 (2009): 9--21. <https://doi.org/10.1386/jams.1.1.9_1>
> *ABSTRACT:* This article engages with contemporary debates on the state of media studies in Africa. It comments on the dialectic between metropolitan centres of knowledge production and dependent peripheries. A brief discussion of Fordism and postFordism and their implications for Africa follows. Nation-building discourses are opposed to hyper-real notions of "meaning", calling on Africans to transcend their idealized understanding of "culture", "African values" and identity as unchanging absolutes. The often alarming anti-democratic conceptual, policy and ideological shifts that occur when theories travel between different contexts are examined. Some research agendas for Africa in the postmodern age are proposed. 
       
<br>



Thanks for reading! The History of Media Studies Newsletter, a monthly email assembled by Dave Park, Jeff Pooley, and Pete Simonson, maintains a loose affiliation with the [*History of Media Studies*](https://hms.mediastudies.press) journal and the [Working Group on the History of Media Studies](https://www.chstm.org/media-studies). Please [contact us](mailto:hms@mediastudies.press) with any questions, suggestions, or items.

This is the December 2023 issue of [*History of Media Studies Newsletter*](https://hms.mediastudies.press/newsletter). You can [subscribe](https://buttondown.email/hms) or [unsubscribe](https://buttondown.email/api/emails/unsubscribe/7357).